December 8th, 2015Data, Design, and Society (DDS) Course overviewPhase 0: Introduction and PreparationPhase 1: Food and Sustainability Fast HackPhase 2: Digging DeeperPhase 3: Food and Sustainability Slow HackPhase 4: ReportingIntroduction and Preparation (Course phase 0)KEY DATES:Course start: Wednesday, January 13thTeam formation: Wednesday, January 20thDESCRIPTION:In this phase, you will be introduced to the main ideas and goals of the DDS course. It will explain our intended ways of working, and why we might want to do something that looks so different to a typical university course. Overall, we are using a “hack methodology” in conjunction with tools and techniques from design, the social sciences, and informatics. What is a hack/hackathon? A hack (or hackathon) originally referred to a group of programmers, designers, and other technology experts engaging in a short period of intensive development (e.g. “build an app/game in a weekend!”). Now the term is often used more broadly, to refer to any period of focused, intensive collaboration between experts and stakeholders. Hacks may be about solving a particular problem (e.g. making dementia-friendly bathrooms), or more generally exploring a topic (e.g. what can you make with available open data sets?). For example, the recent Walk Hack (October 2015) brought together researchers, designers, technologists, Edinburgh council representatives, local organisations and interested residents in order to work together on ideas for promoting walking in the Edinburgh city centre. How could it be made safer, more interesting, more appealing, “better”? As part of the DDS hack method, students will work in small interdisciplinary teams, and are required to involve community stakeholders in their project at several points during the course. All teams will be presenting to one another and giving each other feedback throughout the course. Part of the point of a Hack is to exchange expertise, viewpoints and ideas, to make mistakes, and to try new things. There will be two separate hacks as a part of DDS: a Fast Hack (Phase 1) intended to explore our theme (below), identify specific problems and generate ideas, and a Slow Hack (Phase 3) intended to develop a single design in more depth, over a longer period of time. Theme: Food and SustainabilityIn 2016, DDS will have a “Food and Sustainability” theme, focused on the University of Edinburgh community. In Phase 0, several speakers will present on food and sustainability issues, and we will also look at university and EUSA policy on this issue. All DDS teams will focus on developing a design-led proposal to solve a problem within ONE food and sustainability sub-theme:• Waste in Pollock Halls dining hall• Packaging waste• Increasing student selection of healthy/sustainable food options (might be on or off-campus, ingredients or pre-prepared food) Orientation to skills and contentWe do not expect that students will start DDS with all the skills they will need to be successful. Between lecture content, activities, and homework, we will introduce 4 key topics in preparation for the Fast Hack phase (food and sustainability issues; intro to design thinking; intro to data and information; intro to observation, ethnography, and ethics). We will revisit these topics in phase 2 (Digging Deeper). It is very important to attend class and keep up with homework in the first weeks, as these cover information essential to participating in the next phases of the course. Students will find it very difficult to catch up on this information later.Starting in Phase 0 and continuing throughout the course, we will also work on writing, presenting, and teamwork skills. Individuals and groups will be pushed to explain and justify their work. We see these as central to course success, and as major transferable skills that students can take away from DDS.BY THE END OF THIS PHASE: You should have a clear idea of what the DDS course will be about and what you will do for the rest of term. You should have participated in class and homework activities to orient yourself to the 4 key topics. You should have signed the DDS ethics agreement.Your group should have formed, chosen ONE of the four sub-themes, and discussed different group members' interests within that sub-theme as a preparation for the Fast Hack. Food and Sustainability Fast Hack (Course phase 1)KEY DATES:Fast Hack event: Beginning Wednesday January 27th, 2016Group Presentations: Class time, Friday January 29th, 2016Fast Hack individual reporting (formative assignment 1): due Monday, February 8th, 2016DESCRIPTION:In this phase, you and your group will conduct a preliminary investigation on a sub-theme related to food and sustainability. This is the first step to identifying a specific problem or question that your group will work on for the rest of term, designing a possible solution. You will need to put into practice the skills and knowledge introduced in phase 0. Participating fully in the Fast Hack and being engaged with your group is the best possible preparation for the rest of the course. The Fast Hack has two main tasks for each group:1. Gather information about your chosen sub-theme and its state at the University of Edinburgh, right now2. Identify specific problems/questions within your sub-theme, and generate ideas for how to address those  problems/questionsTASK 1: Information-gatheringIn order to propose a design-led solution to a problem, you must first identify a specific problem, and understand the context in which you are working. What is happening (or not happening) right now with respect to your sub-theme? What do people want, think, do, or say in relation to the sub-theme? During the Fast Hack, you are a detective. Just as a detective must go to places and speak to people in order to understand “what happened” and why, you must leave the classroom and spend time in the university community to understand what's happening (and why) on your chosen sub-theme. While DDS students already have experiences around food and sustainability at the university, it is very important not to ONLY rely on your group's pre-existing ideas. Try to look at familiar things with “fresh eyes”, as though you were visiting an unknown place or culture. Question things that seem given, or obvious.The 4 DDS sub-themes are still very big. Your group will need to think about your interest and priorities within the sub-theme. Your group will need to plan:• Where to go during Fast Hack• Who to talk to-- may be groups, individuals, organisations• What you want to find out (types of information to collect)• Practicalities: any equipment needed, staying in touch on the day, storing information... At the same time as planning how to use your time, you should be ready to follow up on interesting, unexpected things you might stumble across during your investigation.Some starting information for the Fast Hack is available here:• Food and sustainability: e.g. university policy...• Data sets:• Other???TASK 2: Identify problems and generate ideasOnce you have some done some information-gathering from relevant locations and people, you can start to identify specific problem areas. What are smaller challenges, within the sub-topic, to which you might be able to design a proof-of-concept solution? At this stage, your group does not have to (and SHOULD NOT) choose only one problem and solution. You should show that you have identified several possible problems and solutions, based on the Fast Hack.At this stage, you do not need to have worked out all the details of an idea, and do not need to worry about financial viability or building anything. Focus on generating and communicating ideas that could potentially help solve your identified problem. What would you do, and why? What impact might this idea have on food and sustainability?YOUR PRESENTATION:We're asking your presentation to address three questions, using as many forms of information as you can reasonably collect during the Fast Hack:• What is the current state of your food and sustainability sub-theme at the University? Where are we starting from--what is happening (or not happening) right now?• What are some of the specific food and sustainability problems you might be able to address, within this sub-theme?• What are some possible ideas for addressing each problem (i.e. improving some aspect of food-related sustainability)?In the presentation, your group needs to be able to explain what information you collected (and/or looked up), what kind of information it is, and how the answers to your three questions (current state, possible problems, possible ideas) are based on your Fast Hack information. Be ready to explain how, where, and when you collected this information. You are encouraged to make your presentations visual-- use photos, drawings, videos, animations, graphs, maps (etc) to help communicate about the information you collected, and your design ideas. BY THE END OF THIS PHASE: You should have started your summative individual reporting (due early in next phase) including commenting specifically on your contribution to the Fast Hack ideas and presentation.Your group should have created a presentation of the information gathered in Fast Hack, and your initial ideas, and be able to clearly explain what you have done so far and why.Your group should have stored any collected data in accordance with approved DDS and university data management and privacy requirements. LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR THIS PHASE:• Synthesize and communicate the information from two or more datasets using appropriate analytic, presentation and visualisation techniques.• Interpret and evaluate data in a way that demonstrates its relevance to selected communication and/or policy objectives.• Demonstrate an ability to work in an interdisciplinary team and to act in a professional manner when interacting with stakeholders and the public.Digging Deeper (Course phase 2)KEY DATES:Stakeholder focus groups: to be scheduled in week of  February 1-5Fast Hack individual reporting (formative assignment 1): due Monday, February 8th, 2016Peer feedback on Fast Hack individual reports: due February.....Innovative Learning Week (no class): February 15-19th DESCRIPTION:This phase is the transition between the initial information-gathering and problem exploration in the  Fast Hack, and developing a single, more nuanced problem solution during the Slow Hack (phase 3). Your group will continue to discuss, process and build on the information gained in the Fast Hack, through a combination of individual, group, and class activities.To gain the skills and information needed to conduct a larger and more sophisticated version of the Fast Hack, we will “dig deeper” into the topics we introduced in phases 0 and 1. These topics include data types, management, and data vs information, and also ethics, privacy, and methods for working with stakeholders (and analysing the results). This will involve a combination of class exercises and lectures, videos, readings, and interactive iPython online notebooks. All groups need to further explore the possible problems/solutions they identified in the Fast Hack, and collect more information about their sub-theme. At the end of Fast Hack, groups will not be ready to go directly into the Slow Hack. That is why we have a specific transition phase.Stakeholder focus groupsAs part of the exploration and information-gathering process, each group will hold a small focus group with university stakeholders during phase 2. This is essentially a discussion around specific questions, moderated by a researcher (in this case, a member of your group). Through stakeholders’ discussion with each other and the group members, there will be an opportunity to gain more information about the problem area, generate new ideas, and get preliminary feedback about ideas from the Fast Hack. Even if your group likes an idea, stakeholders may not understand the idea, or think it meets their needs! The course staff will help you to organise the stakeholder focus group, and recruit participants. There will be a supported, in-class data analysis session to help you make sense of the information you collect. Your group will need to organise your own, additional design session with stakeholders during the Slow Hack. You will be expected to be much more independent during the Slow Hack, so it is essential to fully participate in the phase 2 focus group and analysis sessions in order to learn these skills.BY THE END OF THIS PHASE: You should have completed all class and homework activities to equip yourself with the skills needed for the Slow Hack, including the basic skills needed to work with stakeholders.Your group should have completed a stakeholder focus group and analysed the resulting data.Your group should have narrowed down their ideas and identified a specific question or problem area within your sub-topic. The group can give a clear explanation of what the problem is, and explain how this choice was justified by information you have collected, including information from the stakeholder focus group.Your group should have stored any newly collected data in accordance with approved DDS and university data management and privacy requirements. LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR THIS PHASE:• Identify and apply relevant strategies for data collection and related prototype 'interventions' which address the interests and needs of a specified community of stakeholders.• Demonstrate an ability to work in an interdisciplinary team and to act in a professional manner when interacting with stakeholders and the public.Food and Sustainability Slow Hack (Course phase 3)KEY DATES:Last day for data collection: Friday March 11thPD activity with stakeholders: your group must schedule between February 24th and March 11th DESCRIPTION:In this phase, your group will start with the design idea identified during the Digging Deeper phase, and flesh out this idea into a proof-of-concept solution to your problem. Your idea will likely evolve over the Slow Hack as you discuss it further, consult stakeholders, and collect new data—it might look very different in the end than at the start. This is good! In class, we will continue working on skills around interpreting data and using it to tell stories and build convincing arguments. There will also be in-class tutorial help available for your group, to help you plan your activity in this phase and work with the data you are collecting. How is this different than the Fast Hack?In one sentence, Fast Hack was broad but shallow, while the Slow Hack is narrower, deeper, and more concerned with details.  The Fast Hack was trying to find out as much as possible, as quickly as possible because the group did not yet know what might be particularly interesting or useful within their sub-theme. A main goal was to identify several problems or questions, for which the group might propose several initial ideas. By the start of the Slow Hack, groups have narrowed down to ONE problem area or question, by continuing to build on and refine work started in the Fast Hack. The group now has an idea about a possible solution, and Slow Hack will develop this initial idea into a proof-of-concept design. Determining what to do is a main part of “the work” in Slow Hack!In phases 0-2, the different DDS groups will likely have been doing similar things and will have had specific instructions from the lecturer. In this phase your group has more choice and more responsibility to determine what you need to do.  It is up to each group to use their experience and the course resources from phases 0-2 in order to develop their starting idea into a more detailed, proof-of-concept design. Unlike earlier phases, there will not be specific instructions on exactly what information to look for, or what to do.  Developing and justifying your group’s course of action—out of the many possibilities—is a main part of the work in this stage. For example, it might be very important for one group to be building and critiquing prototypes of a physical object, but that might make no sense for another group’s idea, which features a website.Participatory design with stakeholdersAll groups are required to have at least one more participatory design session with stakeholders (most groups may only have time for 1, but are welcome to do more). Unlike in phase 2, there will now be several options for what type of session to do. Your group will need to choose which option makes most sense for your project, and will get you the feedback and information you need. Do not underestimate the amount of planning required for this to be successful. Your group is encouraged to discuss their goals and options, and start organising a session as soon as they can. BY THE END OF THIS PHASE: You should understand and be able to explain what your group has done in the Slow Hack and why those actions were chosen, out of the available possibilities.Your group should have conducted an additional participatory design session with university stakeholders, abiding by the DDS and university ethics requirements. Data analysis may still be in progress. Your group should have engaged in whatever other activities are necessary to develop your initial idea into a proof-of-concept scale idea. This will definitely include discussion, reflection, and critique within the group. This may include creating sketches, maps, physical prototypes, a website, or some other representation of your idea; may include additional data collection or seeking out existing data; may include additional participatory design; other. Your group does NOT need to have “solved” your problem. In the next phase, you will need to show that your idea has the potential to solve or at least affect the problem.You and your group should have stored any newly collected data in accordance with approved DDS and university data management and privacy requirements. LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR THIS PHASE:• Identify and apply relevant strategies for data collection and related prototype 'interventions' which address the interests and needs of a specified community of stakeholders.• Demonstrate an ability to work in an interdisciplinary team and to act in a professional manner when interacting with stakeholders and the public.Reporting (Course phase 4)KEY DATES:Design critique, peer feedback group mini-presentations: Class time, Wednesday March 16thGroup Slow Hack presentations (worth 25%): class time, Wednesday March 23rdFeedback (unclear on syllabus what this is): class time, Friday March 25thSummative individual reporting (assignment 2, worth 75%): due Friday, April 1st (not a joke)DESCRIPTION:The big goal of this phase is to bring all of your group’s information together and use it to tell a clear, convincing, easy-to-understand story about a particular problem related to Food and Sustainability, and how your proof-of-concept idea has the potential to solve this problem. You will have stopped collecting new data.  In this phase, you are analysing and making sense of the information you already have (through qualitative description, statistics, visualisations, connection to policy documents and other data sets...). In class, there will be tutorial help available (similar to phase 3), to help your group work with data (summarisation, visualisation, statistics) and use it a part of your overall argument. These skills on understanding and presenting data, and using it as a way to “tell stories” about a phenomenon, are some of the most versatile transferable skills we will cover in this course. The “reporting” part of this phase includes a group presentation (worth 25%) and an individual report (worth 75%). The presentation and report are similar to the format and requirements of the Fast Hack presentation/report completed earlier in the semester, and for which you will have already received formative feedback. Design critique, peer feedback group mini-presentationsTo help groups work on their data interpretation and their explanations of their project, we will have  an in-class design critique and feedback session. Each group will briefly present some of their Slow Hack findings and data to the rest of the class, and have a chance to discuss these. This presentation is NOT GRADED and is not expected to be “finished” in any way. It is about discussing, more than presenting. Having fresh input can also be very valuable, as members of other groups may suggest new, previously unseen connections and implications. An overall idea—or the explanation of an idea--can be substantially strengthened after outside input. Professional researchers and designers definitely engage in this type of critique and peer feedback and find it very valuable, which is why we are doing it here. YOUR PRESENTATION:We're asking your presentation to address three broad questions, using the information you have collected over the course of the semester (all phases).• Briefly, what is the current state of your food and sustainability sub-theme at the University? Where are we starting from--what is happening (or not happening) right now? Focus on the sub-theme as it relates to the specific question your group addressed. • What is the specific question or problem that your group has investigated? Why focus on this question?• How does your group propose to address this problem? Describe the design of your proof-of-concept solution. What is the idea, how would it work? Convince us that your idea has the potential to solve the problem. • Connections to university policy?In the presentation, your group needs to explain what data you collected (and/or looked up in existing datasets) and what kind of data it is. If asked, be ready to give details on how, where, and when it was collected. The answer to each broad question needs to clearly and explicitly state how the group’s actions and decisions were informed by data.You are encouraged to make your presentations very visual-- use photos, drawings, videos, animations, graphs, visualisations, maps (etc) to help communicate about the data you collected, and your design ideas. You are also welcome to use physical objects, apps/websites, or to “role play” how your idea would work. It is up to your group how best to communicate your problem, your data, and the proof-of-concept solution.BY THE END OF THIS PHASE: You should have completed your summative individual reporting, including commenting specifically on your contribution to the final proof-of-concept design and the group presentation.Your group should be able to communicate the overall idea of your project (problem + solution) in a tweet (i.e. 140 characters).Your group should have created a presentation of your problem and your design solution, which tells a clear and compelling story based on the data collected in all phases. Your group should have archived, destroyed, or handed over your data and metadata, as per DDS policies and your individual group’s planning. Your group should have.... other documentation, photos, text for web? Basically any other end-of-project reporting outwith presentation.LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR THIS PHASE:• Synthesize and communicate the information from two or more datasets using appropriate analytic, presentation and visualisation techniques.• Interpret and evaluate data in a way that demonstrates its relevance to selected communication and/or policy objectives.